---
title: "Let all the souls here rest in peace,for we willnot repeat the evil: Teaching theBombing of Hiroshima Through Hibakusha Testimony"
author: Alessandro Getzel
prize: Alessandro Getzel, 1st Prize 2020
layout: post
published: false
image: newton-poster.jpg
---

<div markdown="1" class="essay">

*Edited version. To see original format of essay in PDF, please go [here](https://scholarship.tricolib.brynmawr.edu/bitstream/handle/10066/23013/Newton_2020_1st_Getzel.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y)*

# "Let all the souls here rest in peace,for we willnot repeat the evil: Teaching theBombing of Hiroshima Through Hibakusha Testimony" 
## by *Alessandro Getzel*

This book collection does not represent a lifelong fascination with Japan or deep-seated fear of nuclear weaponry. Rather, this collection is the result of a recent call to action that I experienced while in Hiroshima. Over the course of the last semester, I have been learning Japanese and researching Hiroshimaas part of the Social Innovation Program through the Lang Center. Using funds from Project Pericles, I was able to visit Hiroshima for about a week in late January. I was supposed to go on the trip with another student andmy professor,but they were delayed due to inclement weather. It was throughthisrandom turn of eventsthat I found myself, alonein Japan,sitting inthe courtyard of Honkawa Elementary School, sobbing profusely.

Honkawa Elementaryis part memorial, part peace museum, and part functioning school. The small campus functioning elementary school while having a section of the campus devoted to the memorial Peace Museum which talked about the students killed in the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and how school was subsequently used as a field hospital.The museum told the story of the 400-plus students who were killed on that day and the roughly 200 who were able to evacuate into the nearby countryside before the bomb was dropped.While walking around the museum and reading about the students who were killed by the atomic bomb, I was still able to hear the sounds of the students who currently attended Honkawa elementary playing outside.The juxtapositionof the carefree young students with apparentremnantsof one of the greatest war crimesin recent history forced me to consider the responsibility that we have as educators and students, to teach young people the history of Hiroshima.

It was from this perspective that the idea for this Newton submission was born. Over the remainderof my time in Hiroshima, I used my time meeting with peace activists and educators in order to developa collectionof booksbased onrecommendations from the people that I encountered. Meeting with the peace community in Hiroshima made me realize that in order to effectively teach about Hiroshima, one must place hibakusha at the centerof the curriculum. Hibakushaare how the Japanese refer to those affected by the atomic bomb. In the decades immediately following the atomic bomb, hibakusha faced wide-spread discrimination from wider Japanese society. Many hibakusha hid their bomb-affected status because radiation-induced health complications led many people to refuseto hire, marry, or interact with hibakusha. Therefore, every hibakusha testimony that I included in my collection is more than just a testimony, it is also a comingout of sorts: hibakusha share their stories in the face of institutionalizeddiscrimination. It is of paramountimportance that Swarthmore, as an institution, strives to elevatethese voices. 

Ultimately, the organization of this collection is very deliberate. The first section looks at primary sources in order to confront the dominant Americannarrativethat dropping theatomic bomb was justifiable. By looking primarily at hibakusha testimony, the first section seeks to unpack the massive human cost of the atomic bomb. The second sectiondeals with how the legacy of Hiroshima can be conveyed throughartisticmediums. The second section includes art, poetry, and narrativeprose as a meansof conveying thesubjective experience and allowing survivors to process their trauma through creativity. Lastly, the final section of my collectionis a comparative analysis of educational pedagogue used in Hiroshima’s educational system. This section is designed to teach American readers how Japanese civil society views the atomic bomb and to empower American readers to educate themselves.The terminal goal of this collection is to craftan interdisciplinary pedagogue in order to help spread theHiroshima’s message of peace and denuclearization.

The title of this collection is taken from the inscription on Hiroshima’s memorial for atomic bomb victims. Many in Hiroshimaviewthe greatest stumbling block impeding meaningful denuclearizationis the fact that that the majority of Americans support the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This collection is my humble attemptto change that beliefin order to ensure that “we will not repeat this evil”.


## Annotated Bibliography: 

### HibakushaTestimony and the Politics of What We Remember

1. Hersey, John. Hiroshima. Stellar Classics, 2014. Print.

John Hersey’s Hiroshima is widely considered aseminal text on the Atomic bombing of Hiroshima. Divided into fivesections,the book follows the story of six hibakushas(atomic bomb survivors) and deals with the subjective testimony of atomic bombing victims. Hersey’s five chapters chroniclethe first days immediately after the bombing.Hersey is deliberate in Hersey introducingsix diverse characters: two doctors, a Protestant minister, a widowed seamstress, a young female factory worker,and a German Catholic priest.The book was originallypublished as a series of articles in the New Yorker. Furthermore, it was the first published work to complicate the dominantAmerican political narrative thatdropping the atomic bomb was necessaryto end WWII. My copy of Hiroshima is a slender brown volume—closer to a pamphletthan a tome—but it contains some of the most foundational writing on Hiroshima and on the power of New Journalism. 

2. Hiroshima Association for the Success of the Atomic Bomb Exhibition. An Anthology of the Experiences of Hiroshima Atomic. Bomb Victims. ChoshuNewspaper Company, 2010. Print

The cover of this book juxtaposes a picture of theHiroshima Convention Center, with the bombed-outruins of the buildingknown as the Atomic Bomb Dome. These radically different scenes are twopictures of the same building taken roughly a week apart. The cover is an unflinching primer for whatthis small blue volume contains: over twenty unique stories from various Hibakusha explaining how their lives were changed after the dropping of the atomic bomb. This book was purchasedat the Hiroshima Memorial Peace Museum for ¥500. The introductionon the inside jacket explains that the book remains so cheap because it is the end goal of HASABE that the peaceful message of Hiroshima isspread to as many people as possible. The introduction concludes with“We hope that our stories spread to America”and it will be that message which will guide my use of the money were I to be awarded the AE Newton Book Award. 

3. Hiroshima Association for the Success of the Atomic Bomb Exhibition. An Anthology of the Experiences of Hiroshima Atomic Bomb Victims.“Second Collection: Air raids,memories,and experiences at the war front”. Yosimura Printing Corporation, 2015. Print

The second volume of An Anthology of the Experiences of Hiroshima Atomic Bomb Victimsbuilds on allthe themes of the previous books. This book was originallynot planned to be published, but in 2010,HASABE, amid calls for pacifistJapan to join US allies in the war on terror,began work on thesecond volume of collected Hibakusha testimony. This volume focuses more heavily on the general horrors of war more broadly; focusing on hibakusha’sexperience during theUS-led air raids. This text is a highly political one which, in the midst of the war on terror,brings to light theharsh realityfor civilians living in a country at war with the United States. Once again, a slender volume contains vibrant and heartbreaking testimony. 

4. Hiroshima and Nagasaki: That We Never Forget. Translated by Miwako Sawada, Elizabeth Baldwin, and Steven Leeper. Edited by Soka Gakkai Youth Division. Soka Gakkai, 2017. 

This book is the most extensive collectionof hibakusha testimony on this list. Whereas the precedingtwo entries serve as primers for thereading hibakusha testimony, Hiroshima and Nagasakiis an extensive collection with over fifty different testimonies. It is impossible to read this bookfor prolonged periodsof timebecauseeachchapter nearly moved me to tears. This book is designed witha specific focus on vulnerable populations impacted by the atomic bomb: several sections are devoted to the experiences of women and families. This book was given to me by its translator,Miwako Sawada. When I visited Hiroshima as part of the PEAC 060 study trip, my trip-mates were delayed due to weather such that I spent my first several days entirely with Miwako.I learned about Miwako’s experience as a peace activist and a translatorand at the end of our time together, she gave me this book as a giftto take back to the US and share with my peers. This booktells the story of brave and indomitablewomen—it was given to me by one of the indomitablewomen I have ever met. 

5. Yoneyama, Lisa. Hiroshima Traces: Time, Space, and the Dialectics of Memory. University of California Press, 1999.

As the only secondary source in this section, Yoneyama’s paperbound text has earned its spot on this list by providinga robust and compelling overview ofthe politics of remembrance. Drawing evidence from a diversity of sources, Yoneyama is ableto problematize how the world has chosen to memorialize victims of theatomic bomb. Yoneyama argues that “acts of remembrance can serve the cause of knowledge if they are notco-opted”. I am includingHiroshima Traceto be used as alenswith which to self-critically examine the precedinghibakusha testimony. 

### Art as a Means of Processing, Conveying andConfronting the Bomb

1. Coerr, Eleanor. Sadako and the Thousand Paper Cranes. Puffin Modern Classics , 1977.

Sadako and the Thousand Paper Cranes is a historicalnovel based on one of thekey symbols of the Japanese peace movement: Sadako Sasaki. The book follows the story of a little girl named Sadako who survives the atomic bombing butis subsequentlydiagnosed with radiation-induced leukemia. Based on a legend which said that if a person folds a thousand paper cranes,they would be granted a wish, Sadako begins to fold paper cranes in her hospital bed in a last-ditch effort to survive her illness. Although Sadako died before completing her thousand cranes, Coerr's book gainedinternational acclaim around the worldand popularized paper cranes a symbol for the anti-nuclearization peace movement. The symbolicsignificanceof thepaper cranes is evident through real-world events: Obama presented the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum with paper cranes on his visit to Hiroshima and a number of the paper cranes folded by Sadako weredonated to the Memorial Museum at Pearl Harbor. 

2. Hiroshima Memorial Peace Museum. Atomic Bomb Drawings by Survivors. The City of Hiroshima, 2007.

This book represents an enduring attempt on the part of the Hiroshima Memorial Peace Museumto recount hibakusha’s testimonythrough a variety of mediums. Atomic Bomb Drawings by Survivorscontains selections from the Museum’s over 3,600 works of art produced by hibakusha. To say that this bookis merelya collection ofdrawings is a vast understatement, ratherthis book holds a collection of visual hibakusha testimony. The importance ofthese visual testimonies cannot be overstated; for many visual learners, texts like this one are vital in understanding the magnitude of the horrors which occurredin Hiroshima. More importantly, for many hibakusha,an artistic outlet gives them an opportunity to effectively process their trauma.

3. Maddox, Amanda, et al. Ishiuchi Miyako: Postwar Shadows. The J. Paul Getty Museum, 2015.

*Postwar* Shadowsis an art book from a Getty retrospective on the works of Ishiuchi Miyako who uses photography to challenge western notions of imperialism, beauty, and war. Her most recent series ひろしま(Hiroshima), examines cultural memory surrounding the atomic bomb. This haunting collection includes a number of photosthat examine articles of clothing thatsurvived the atomic blast.Ishiuchi holds a number of views staunchly opposed to the American narrativesurrounding WWII: Ishiuchiaddressesthe theme of occupation through her photographs of scars, skin, and other markingsand more explicitly, with her images of garments and accessories once owned by victims of the atomic blast in Hiroshima.This book was given to me by my mother who explainedthat if I was attemptingto learn about counternarratives, it would be well worthmy timeto examine a maverick like Ishiuchi.

4. Kohno, Kiyomi. I Will Never Forget that Day. Edited by Akira Hayasaka. Kiyomi Kohno, 2008. 

Kiyomi Kohnowasthe first hibakusha that I meet while in Hiroshima. Kohno-san told the story of, although she lived in the rural countryside outside of Hiroshima,she was forced to venture into the ruins of Hiroshima in orderto search for her missing sister. Although she eventually found her sistershe spent many years never talking about what happened that day, but ultimately, able to unpack her trauma through art and shared with us the pictures that she had drawn in order to process what she had seen. Roughly 2,000 children were mobilized on the whenthe atomic bomb was dropped and eachone was killed nearly instantly. This text serves not only as a creative outlet for Kohnobut also as a meansofmemorializingmany of the child victims of the atomic bomb. I was givenacopy of this book by Kohnoherselfwho explained that it is important that we as Americans do not forget her testimonybecause hibakusha who lived through the atomic bomb do not have the luxuryof forgetting. 

5. Morishita, Hiromu et. al. Pilgrimage to a Ginko Tree. Translated by Eiko Ishizaki. World Friendship Center,1996.

The book contains selected works of poetry by Hiromu Morishita, John Bradley, and Edward A. Dougherty. John Bradley is a poet, playwright, and lifelong peace activist.Bradley partneredwith Doughertyand Morishita, the American and Japanese director, respectively,of the World Friendship Center in Hiroshima. The WFC is a peace-focused rest house in Hiroshimafounded by quaker activist Barbara Reynoldswith the express purpose ofconducting peace education programming for Americans visiting Hiroshima. This book of poetry serves as a symbol of the immensepotential for Japanese-American cooperation in the field of peace education.

### HibakushaTestimony and the Politics of What We Remember

1. Kamada, Nanao. One Day in Hiroshima–An Oral History. Edited by Richard C. Parker and Rick Nelson. Translated by Keiko Ogura, Yoshie Ozaki, Megumi Shimo, Megumi Morita. Shift Project, 2005.

This book was perhaps the single best primer inthe scientific understanding necessaryto fully understand the destructive power of theatomic bomb. Written by a doctornamed Nanao Kamada, who divided the book into three parts: “Past,” “Present” and “Future”.Kamada’s aim in writingthis book is to provide effective summaries of thescience behindnuclear fission and radiation poisoning.Perhaps the most useful sectionin this book is the recommendedreading list designed by Kamadawhichwould serveas an effective syllabus for anysemester-long class looking at Hiroshima or nuclear weapons morebroadly.The addition of the scientific perspective is necessaryforeffectivelyteaching any history of Hiroshima.

2. Shiho, Umino. The Paper Crane Journey: Carrying Sadako’s Prayer. Illustratedby Karino Fukiko. Translated by Keiko Miyamoto and Steve Leeper. ANT Legacy Hiroshima, 2003.

This children’s book was a gift from theexecutivedirector of ANT-Hiroshima, Tomoko Watanabe. ANT-Hiroshima is an NGO based in Hiroshima, Japan, that pursues projects in Asian development, international peacebuilding, and peace education.Sadako’s Prayersame story as Coerr’s book butplaces more emphasis on how Sadako and her paper cranes have become a symbol for international peace activism focusedon children. Part of what makes this book so important is that it isa key partof ANT-Hiroshima’s peace education programming in Afghanirefugee camps: refugee children are taught the story of Sadako, receivetranslated copies, and learn to fold paper cranes. This book, and Sadako’s story more broadly,serves an example of how innovative peace education can be used to build solidarity acrossa number ofbroad cultural contexts.

3. Hiroshima Interpreters for Peace (HIP), Hiroshima Handbook. Edited by Keiko Ogura.HIP, 1995

The Hiroshima handbook serves partially as a textbook and partially as a guidebook. Written by Hiroshima interpreters for peace, the guidebook has been produced to educate peace activists, interpreters, students, and even people visiting from abroad on peace issues relevant to Hiroshima. The text was also designedto beabilingual phrasebook to foster conversation between Japanese and American readers,regardless of the language barrier.The book is divided into a number of sections general information, peace organizations, resource centers, the legal history of the designation of hibakusha, global hibakusha, and further reading. This text was given to me by a hibakusha named Keiko Ogura who served as the main editor for the text. Ogura was willing to meet with my group despite having been incredibly ill. She viewed the opportunity to involve American students in the peace movement as more importantthan her health. That same passion and drive comethrough in every page of the Hiroshima Handbook. In fact, if I were forced to designate one book as most important, Ogura's Hiroshima handbook would be the clear front-runner.

4. Shuppan, Sanyusha, Summer Cloud: A-Bomb Experience of a Girl’s School in Hiroshima.Edited by Hiroshima Jogakuin Jr. & Sr. High School English Department. Hiroshima Jogakuin, 2010. 

Summer Cloudforms a vital portion of the Englishdepartment’scurriculumat Hiroshima Jogakuin Junior High School. For nearly thirty-fiveyears,students at Hiroshima Jogakuinread Summer Cloud in English and give reports on the bookThis program was originallydesigned by Shinchiro Kurose, the former headmaster of Hiroshima Jogakuin and current chairman of the YMCA. In a recent meeting with Kurose Sensei,he gave me acopy of Summer Cloud and explained the curriculumwas designed in orderto educate Japanese young people on the history and justification behind the use of the atomicbomb.This pedagogy showcases the intersection between peace educationand Englishsecond language (ESL) education.In order to fully understand the Japanese perspectiveon Hiroshima, one most examine how Japanesestudents are educated about the topic.Furthermore, thesuccess of the SummerCloud program has led to other local Hiroshima schools adopting the same curriculumand working together in order to sponsor a Week of Peace where students from various schools can meet with one another to discuss Hiroshima’s role as an international peacemaker. 

5. Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum and Hiroshima Municipal Motomachi Senior High School. Atomic Bomb Drawings:2007-2017. Edited by Sayaka Sone, Rina Yamado, and Ami Sedobara. Translated by Yasuhiro Okita and Chie Matoba. Hiroshima Municipal Motomachi Senior High School, 2018.

Similar to *Summer Cloud, Atomic Bomb Drawings:2007-2017* serves as a shiningexample ofhow peace education can be used to facilitate dialogueabout peacebuilding. The Atomic Bomb Drawing Project began in 2004with a partnership between the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum and Hiroshima Municipal Motomachi Senior High School. The program was designed in order to convey the reality I'll see damages and suffering caused by the atomic bomb. Given that so many hibakusha are starting to die off, it became necessary for Hiroshima high school students to learn from hibakushain order to pass down the a-bomb experience to future generations. Groups of high school students are paired with hibakusha. The hibakusha shared their testimony with the students who work to create art based on the hibakushas' stories. This book contains anthology someofthe works produced from this program. This book is emblematic of not only rigorous compassionatescholarship but also of the power and importance of cross-generational conversation.

### Books to Add –Graphic Novels andComparative American Perspectives

1. Army JROTC Leadership Education &Training. Instructor Manual. US Army Cadet Command, Headquarters, Dept. of the Army, 2002.

My desire to include this JROTC training manual is not because it provides an accurate representation of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, but precisely because it provides such a biased accounting. I believe the including countervailing opinions in my collection would be vital in order to explain how entrenched American support for the bombing of Hiroshima. The view expressed by the JROTC is not a controversial one: The narrative that dropping the atomic bomb was necessary in order to end the war this one that is taught in the vast majority of American schools. Ultimately, in order to effectively counteract this narrative,one must fully understand the other side’sopinion.

2. Lifton, Robert Jay. Death in Life: Survivors of Hiroshima. The University of North Carolina Press, 2012.

It would be overly reductive to suggest that Japanese authors and American authors are diametrically opposed in regards to Hiroshima. Robert Jay Lifton is indicative of this fact: the American psychiatrist has become a pioneer in his field for examining the psychological causes and effects of war, violence, and atrocity. Lifton used his privilege as an American in order to bring attention to the psychological toll exacted on the people of Hiroshima. Lifton what is vital in arguing that in addition to financial aid in order to help Japan rebuild, counseling would be necessary in order to ensure that hibakusha would be able to re-enter society. One cannot help but think that if Lifton's advice were followed, many hibakusha would not have had to undergo such horrible discrimination.

3. Jungk, Robert. Children of the Ashes: The People of Hiroshima, the Story of a Rebirth. 1985.

Robert Jungk is a German author who wrote extensively on the issue of nuclear weapons. His book, Children of Asheswas one of the first books to be written on Hiroshima and he introduced the (non-American) world tothe horrors of nuclear weapons.Furthermore, Jungk provides an extensive breakdown of the political decisionsthat went into rebuilding Hiroshima.Jungk worked extensively with a young Keiko Ogura in order to craft a well-researched and persuasive narrative that centers Japanese voices. Children of Ashesremains an example of how an outsider with immense privilegecan use their privilegeto lift up marginalized voices.

4. Aoki, Takeo, et al. Hiroshima's Revival: Remembering How People Overcame Destruction and Despair. Translated by Pauline Baldwin, Shogakukan Creative, Inc.,2016.

Hiroshima's Revivalis a documentary-style dramatized graphic novel thatfocuses on the rebuilding of Hiroshima's municipal services. Hiroshima's Revivalis anoptimistic tale of the triumph of the human spirit over adversity. Althoughthe book avoids morbid imagery of bodies and physical suffering, the graphic novel is not viewing events through rose-colored glasses, the text is incredibly well researched and put deliberate emphasis oncollective participation as vital to Hiroshima’s survival. Ultimately, Hiroshima's Revivalshows that although it is just as important to mourn the victims of the atomic bomb, it is equallyimportant to celebrate the survivorswho were able to triumph over American occupation. 

5. Fetter-Vorm, Jonathan. Trinity: A Graphic History of the First Atomic Bomb. Farrar, Straus &Giroux, 2013.

I view Trinityas the spiritual counterpart to Hiroshima’s Revival: where the latter deals with resilienceand rebuilding, the former tells the story of the massive destruction caused by weaponized science. Trinitytells the story of the Manhattan Project and the moral implications which American scientists are forced to reckon with. The book examines the political, environmental, and psychological effects of the atomic bomb.I believe that bothgraphic novels would serve as digestibleprimersfor anyone who intends to learn more about the atomic bomb and its history. Most importantly, I think that by focusing on the experiences of scientists working on the Manhattan Project, Fetter-Vormgoes a long way towards accomplishing one of the most fundamentalgoals of anti-nuclear activism: teaching us that there are real people on either side of thebig red button.
</div>